Migrating from WordPress to Directus (#127)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: migrate-wordpress-directus/index.md

---
title: 'Migrating from WordPress to Directus'
description: 'This guide will help you migrate from WordPress to Directus. This will enable you to understand the process and how you can apply it in your specific use case.'
author:
  name: 'Muhammed Ali'
  avatar_file_name: 'avatar.jpg'
---

## Introduction
If you are considering transitioning your content management system from WordPress to Directus, this tutorial is for you. By the end, you will understand the process in migrating content, data, and other functionality from WordPress to Directus.

## Understanding the Differences

WordPress is often used as an integrated CMS, meaning it tightly couples content management with presentation. This approach simplifies many tasks but can limit flexibility and performance. 

Directus on the other hand, being a headless CMS, separates the content repository from the presentation layer, offering freedom to use any frontend technology while managing content through a REST or GraphQL API.

This separation implies a paradigm shift in how content is being managed and served.

> ## Directus Terminologies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Directus Terminology
```

> Here are some key terminologies you will come across while following this article or while trying to migrate your specific app to Directus:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is some key terminology you will come across while following this article or while trying to migrate your WordPress project to Directus:
```

Before the migration, audit your WordPress plugins to understand their functionality and the need they fulfill. Unlike WordPress, Directus might not offer direct plugin equivalents, so it is important to understand the **why** behind each plugin being used. Also note that not all plugins need alternatives and the outcomes might be achievable within the Directus' core functionality.
This understanding will guide you in seeking or developing alternatives that align with Directus's architecture. 
Start by making a comprehensive list of all the plugins currently active on your WordPress site. For each plugin, note down what it does. 
You might have something like **Yoast SEO** for your blog which enhances SEO capabilities, including meta tags, sitemaps, and readability analysis.
Directus doesn't have a built-in SEO plugin equivalent as a headless system - it is down to your application to implement features based on data held in Directus. 

For example, you can manage SEO metadata by creating custom fields in your collections for titles, meta descriptions, and other SEO-related information. You might also develop or use existing extensions to generate sitemaps.

> ## Steps to Migrate Content From WordPress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating Content From WordPress
```

Start by exporting your WordPress data. Here it is assumed you already have a Wordpress site. WordPress offers a built-in export tool that generates an XML file of your content. However, for a more comprehensive export, especially for custom post types and metadata, we will be using a plugin that can export to formats more conducive to manipulation like JSON. 
On your Wordpress Admin, in the **Plugins** tab search for “**WP Import Export Lite”**. Install and activate it. 
After the installation select “**WP Imp Exp**” on the tab then select “**Post**” and select the format JSON in “**Advanced Options**” dropdown. Now you can download the [JSON file](https://github.com/khabdrick/wordpress-directus/blob/main/WP-data.json).
The JSON file we will use in this tutorial is a collection of blog posts from a WordPress site, each containing information such as the post ID, title, content, date, and permalink. 
You can use this same step to export the [Pages JSON data](https://github.com/khabdrick/wordpress-directus/tree/main). This file contains two pages with its title, content, and date it was created.

![JSON export from Wordpress](wp-exp.png)

### Designing Your Directus Schema

> Before importing data into Directus, design your schema in Directus by creating collections (equivalent to WordPress's post types. In the JSON exports Post Type "post" and "page" )), and fields (similar to WordPress's fields: Title, Content, Date, etc.). This step is critical and requires a deep understanding of your content structure to ensure the data is imported correctly into your Directus setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before importing data into Directus, design your schema in Directus by creating collections (equivalent to WordPress's post types. In the JSON exports Post Type "post" and "page" ) and fields (similar to WordPress's fields: Title, Content, Date, etc). This step is critical and requires a deep understanding of your content structure to ensure the data is imported correctly into your Directus setup.
```

![Import in Directus Collection](import-items.png)

If you have images in the post or pages, you won’t be able to access them. With the Directus REST API we will be able to manipulate the JSON to extact the images and save to Directus Files so we can access the files in the post.
To use the API we need to get the API token at User Directory → Administrator → Admin User → Token. Copy the token and Keep it somewhere, we will use it later.
 
## Creating Import Scripts

In this section, we will work on the code to export the JSON data into our Directus fields. We will use Python to develop the script but if you are not familiar with Python don’t worry, I will explain everything and show you how to run the code.
The files gotten from WordPress have the following keys, but what we will be extracting will be "Title", "Content", and "Date". 
```json
{
    "ID": "2",
    "Title": "Sample Page",
    "Content": "...",
    "Excerpt": "...",
    "Date": "2024-04-08 15:33:50",
    "Post Type": "...",
    "Permalink": "..."
  },
```

> ### The URL replacer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Replacing Image URLs
```

> As I mentioned before, some images are in the posts and we need to extract those images and save them to Directus. After a file is saved to Directus, the JSON file is updated with the Directus image URL. Then, after the changes are completed, the new JSON file is saved locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are images present in posts, they must be extracted and saved to Directus. After a file is saved, the JSON file is updated with the new Directus asset URL. Then, after the changes are completed, the new JSON file is saved locally.
```

        print(new_image_url)
        # Replace the old image URL with the new one in the content
        post["Content"] = content.replace(image_url, new_image_url)
# Output the modified JSON data to a new file or print it out
output_file_path = "modified_WP-data.json"
with open(output_file_path, "w") as file:
    json.dump(data, file, indent=4)
# Print a message to indicate completion
print("The JSON data has been updated with Directus image URLs.")
```

The code above opens and reads a JSON file specified by `json_file_path`. It then loops through `"Content"` field.  Within each post's content, the code checks for the presence of an `<img>` tag by looking for the substring `'<img src="'`. If such a substring is found, it means the post contains an image. The code then extracts the URL of this image by locating the substring that starts immediately after `'<img src="'` and ends at the next double-quote (`"`). 
The extracted image URL is then passed to a function named `upload_to_directus` (this will be created next) to upload the image to Directus. The function returns `new_image_url` to this loop to replace the old URL in the post's content with this new URL.

> ### The image uploader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Uploading Images
```

Now we will develop the function that will post the images to Directus and get the new URL. Paste the following code in above the code you have already.

```python
import json
import requests
import os
# Replace with the path to your JSON file

> json_file_path = "WP-data.json" # Change this with the Pages JSON file to extract images for pages.

Reviewer: I asked for this to be restructured slightly so it opened with the imports and link to the JSON file. https://github.com/directus-labs/guest-authoring/pull/127#discussion_r1562635642

Author: Yeah, I did that in "Creating Import Scripts" section. That was the section you marked previously.
I have put it in  "Replacing Image URLs" too since that section uses the file. This section is just a continuation of "Replacing Image URLs" and it doesn't use the file at all.

Author: Ohh yeah, corrected that

    with open(temp_image_path, "wb") as file:
        file.write(image_content)
    headers = {"Authorization": "Bearer your-api-token"}
    files = {
        "file": open(
            temp_image_path, "rb"
        )  # Open the temporary file to include in the request
    }
    directus_upload_url = "https://your.directus.app/files"
    print(f"Uploading image to Directus: {directus_upload_url}")
    response = requests.post(directus_upload_url, files=files, headers=headers)
    response_str = response.json()
    directus_image_id = response_str\["data"\]["id"]
    # Cleanup: remove the temporary image file
    os.remove(temp_image_path)
    # Construct the Directus image URL from the response
    directus_image_url = f"https://your.directus.app/assets/{directus_image_id}"
    print(f"Directus Image URL: {directus_image_url}")
    return directus_image_url
```

Replace `your-api-token` in the code above with the token you generated earlier. Also replace `*https://your.directus.app*` with your Directus app URL.
Assuming you have Python installed already you can run the code to create the new JSON file.
```bash
python extract-image.py
```

> ### The post uploader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Uploading Posts
```

Directus doesn't have a built-in SEO plugin equivalent. However, you can manage SEO metadata by creating custom fields in your collections for titles, meta descriptions, and other SEO-related information. You might also develop or use existing extensions to generate sitemaps.

## Steps to Migrate Content From WordPress

Migrating from WordPress to Directus involves some steps, primarily focusing on data migration.
**1. Exporting WordPress Data**
Start by exporting your WordPress data. Here it is assumed you already have a Wordpresss site. WordPress offers a built-in export tool that generates an XML file of your content. However, for a more comprehensive export, especially for custom post types and metadata, we will be using plugin that can export to formats more conducive to manipulation like JSON. 
On your Wordpress Admin, in the **Plugins** tab search for “**WP Import Export Lite”**. Install and activate it. 
After the installation select “**WP Imp Exp**” on the tab then select “**Post**” and select the format JSON in “**Advanced Options**”. Now you can download the JSON file.

![JSON export from Wordpress](wp-exp.png)

> 

Author: “**Advanced Options**” is a dropdown to click. It is not in the image because you need to scroll down a bit.

> 

Reviewer: What do you mean?

> 

Author: Don't worry, I think I misread the comment

Now we will create the fields that will hold the data items. If you are using my JSON data create the following fields:

![FIelds for Collection](fields-creation.png)

:::info Box title
*Note that the “Content” field has a Field type of* ***WYSIWYG****, the rest are* ***Input*** *type.*
:::

**3. Importing Data into Directus**
After the JSON file is extracted and the schema is developed on Directus, you can go to your Collections page on Directus admin and you will see a button there to import and export. Just choose export and select the JSON file you downloaded. 

![IMport in Directus Collection](import-items.png)

The problem with this method is, if you have images in the post, you won’t be able to access them. This is the advantage of Directus having a REST API. This the RESTAPI we will be able to manipulate the JSON to extact the images and save to Directus Files so we can access the files in the post.
To use the API we need to get the API token at User Directory → Administrator → Admin User → Token. Copy the token and Keep it somewhere, we will use it later.
 

> We will also need  some permissions to post items to our Collection. You can grant those permissions at **Settings** → **Access Control** → **Public.** Allow all Permissions or whatever permisions you prefer.

Author: Ohh okay

![Set permission](permissions.png)

> ## Developing the Script to Export to Directus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating Import Scripts
```

Important term change - exporting from WP, importing to Directus.

Author: For the Pages, the process is the same. That's why I didn't include it. But I have made some updates to include it.

3. For each post in the JSON file, it constructs a payload dictionary that contains the post's title, content, and date. 
4. Sends a `POST` request to the Directus API to create a new item in the `article` collection (or table) using the prepared payload. The Directus URL and the specific endpoint (`/items/article`) are constructed using the `directus_url` parameter. Authentication and content type are handled by the previously prepared headers.

Now run with the following command:
```bash
python directus.py
```
After the code is complete you sshould be able to see your items on Directus.

![Items on Directus](items export.png)

Now that you have your data in Directus you can start looking at how you  can develop the Frontend with a library like [React](https://docs.directus.io/guides/real-time/chat/react.html) or any one you prefer. 

## Testing and Validation

Because you are moving from one platform to another, you might have some text formating not appearing right. It’s unlikely but possible so look through the imported content in Directus to ensure all data has been accurately migrated and maintains its formating. 

> If the data you moved is like integer or normal textfield you have nothing to worry about. 

Author: okay
